Add post: Lifetime Event Loop (#869)
crystal-lang/crystal-website: _posts/2024-11-05-lifetime-event-loop.md

using `-Devloop=kqueue` (BSDs) or `-Devloop=epoll` (e.g. Solaris).

Windows is unaffected and keeps using `IOCP`.

Dropping `libevent` removes an external runtime dependency from Crystal
programs.

## Caveats

In some cases the new implementation may cause issues. You can switch
back to the old event loop implementation with the compile-time flag
`-Devloop=libevent`.

We are aware of some potential regressions but believe they are quite rare and
should not hinder general availability of this new feature. Exposure through
nightly builds should help us gather more usage data to assess whether there are
any more noteworthy implications we have not been aware of.

### Timers and Timeouts

At this point, there's a missing optimization for timers (`sleep 1.second`) and
timeouts (`socket.read_timeout = 1.second`). In case you're using lots of them,
it might lead to performance degradation.

This is only a temporary limitation until we finish the implementation of an
efficient data structure. We're already working on that.

### Multi-Threading

The new implementation works well with the multi-threading preview
(`-Dpreview_mt`), having one event loop instance per thread.

> There is on caveat though: Moving file descriptors with pending operations

Reviewer: As with the RFC, the breaking change should be shouted out. Also, the distinction between transferring FDs without pending operations should stand. More like "It is possible to transfer a file descriptor between threads **as long as there are no pending operations**."

Reviewer: This last bit is to not make it sound like trasferring is not possible at all (for the casual reader)

Reviewer: @straight-shoota have you seen this?

> between event loop instances – i.e. between threads – is an error.
> 
> For example: Let's assume fiber `A` running on thread `X` waits on file
> descriptor `4`. While this operation is still pending, fiber `B` running on
> thread `Y` tries to start another operation on file descriptor `4`. This is now
> going to raise. File descriptors can only be owned by a single event loop
> instance _at a time_. We can still transfer sockets and files without pending
> operations across fibers without risks.
> 
> This limitation will be mitigated with the arrival of execution contexts from
> [RFC #0002] which share one event loop instance between all threads in a
> context.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, the first time I read the phrase I missed the `pending` word :sweat_smile: 

Maybe:

```suggestion
There is one caveat though: file descriptors can only be owned by a single
event loop instance _at a time_. A file descriptor _can be moved_ from one
fiber to another, possibly moving from one event loop instance to another
along the way (transparently), but this is only possible if there are no
pending operations on that file descriptor.

For example: Let's assume fiber `A` running on thread `X` waits on file
descriptor `4`. While this operation is still pending, fiber `B` running on
thread `Y` tries to start another operation on file descriptor `4`. This is now
going to raise.

This limitation will be mitigated with the arrival of execution contexts from
[RFC #0002] which share one event loop instance between all threads in a
context.
```

Reviewer 2: This is mostly the same, but reordered :)

Author: The suggested diff looks odd because it seems to strip off the last line of the preceding paragraph. Is that intended?

Reviewer 2: Sigh, GitHub seems to have cut the first line when selecting :face_exhaling: 

Not intended, indeed.

using `-Devloop=kqueue` (BSDs) or `-Devloop=epoll` (e.g. Solaris).

Windows is unaffected and keeps using `IOCP`.

Dropping `libevent` removes an external runtime dependency from Crystal
programs.

## Caveats

In some cases the new implementation may cause issues. You can switch
back to the old event loop implementation with the compile-time flag
`-Devloop=libevent`.

We are aware of some potential regressions but believe they are quite rare and
should not hinder general availability of this new feature. Exposure through
nightly builds should help us gather more usage data to assess whether there are
any more noteworthy implications we have not been aware of.

### Timers and Timeouts

At this point, there's a missing optimization for timers (`sleep 1.second`) and
timeouts (`socket.read_timeout = 1.second`). In case you're using lots of them,
it might lead to performance degradation.

This is only a temporary limitation until we finish the implementation of an
efficient data structure. We're already working on that.

### Multi-Threading

The new implementation works well with the multi-threading preview
(`-Dpreview_mt`), having one event loop instance per thread.

> There is on caveat though: Moving file descriptors with pending operations
> between event loop instances – i.e. between threads – is an error.

Reviewer: Leftover.

```suggestion
```

---
title: "Lifetime Event Loop"
author: straight-shoota,ysbaddaden
summary: ""
categories: technical
tags: [feature, eventloop, concurrency]
---

A core component of Crystal's concurrency model is the **event loop**. It
integrates asynchronous operations into the runtime, enabling other fibers to
run while one fiber waits to read data on a socket, for example.

We're changing how the event loop operates under the hood on Unix systems in [#14996].

The new implementation integrates the Crystal event loop directly with system
selectors, [`epoll`](https://linux.die.net/man/7/epoll) (Linux, Android) and
[`kqueue`](https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?kqueue) (BSDs, macOS) instead of
going through [`libevent`](https://libevent.org/).

In the process we're changing that file descriptors now stay subscribed to the
event loop for their entire lifetime, instead of being added and removed on

> every single operation. This reduces overhead and improves performance.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like:

> Not short of removing an external dependency, and taking control over a core feature, this also changes how file descriptors are treated: instead of being added and removed on every blocking IO operation, the file descriptors are now added once and kept for their full lifetime, which is how `epoll` and `kqueue` have been designed.

This post highlights the relevant information for users.

More technical details are available in [RFC #0009].

## Effects

The new implementation has been merged into `master` and is available in
[nightly builds](/install/nightly).

No changes in user code are required, everything plugs right in.

The new implementation is supported on Linux, macOS, FreeBSD and Android and
automatically enabled on these systems. Read [more about
availability][availability] in the RFC.

> All other operating systems keep the previous event loop driver: `libevent` on
> Unix systems, `IOCP` on Windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the time being other UNIX operating systems still use the `libevent` event loop by default (regressions, issues or untested). You can still force enable it using `-Devloop=kqueue` (BSDs) or `-Devloop=epoll` (e.g. Solaris).

Windows is unaffected and keeps using `IOCP`.
```

In case of performance regression or other issues, you can switch
back to the legacy event loop implementation with the compile-time flag

> `-Deventloop=libevent`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe merge this paragraph with the caveat paragraph below?

Dropping `libevent` removes an external runtime dependency from Crystal
programs.

## Caveats

In some cases the new implementation may cause issues. If you're affected,
we recommend falling back to `libevent` with `-Deventloop=libevent`.

> We are aware of some scenarios but believe they are quite rare and should not

Reviewer 2: Maybe you meant "potential regressions" or "issues" instead of "scenarios"?

hinder general availability of this new feature. Exposure through nightly builds
should help us gather more usage data to assess whether there are any more
noteworthy implications we have not been aware of.

### Timers and Timeouts

At this point, there's a missing optimization for timers (`sleep 1.second`) and
timeouts (`socket.read_timeout = 1.second`). In case you're using lots of them,
it might lead to performance degradation.

This is only a temporary limitation until we finish the implementation of an
efficient data structure. We're already working on that.

### Multi-Threading

The new implementation works well with the multi-threading preview
(`-Dpreview_mt`), having one event loop instance per thread.

There is on caveat though: Moving file descriptors with pending operations
between event loop instances – i.e. between threads – is an error.

For example: Let's assume fiber `A` running on thread `X` waits on file
descriptor `4`. While this operation is still pending, fiber `B` running on
thread `Y` tries to start another operation on file descriptor `4`. This is now
going to raise. File descriptors can only be owned by a single event loop

> instance.

Reviewer 2: Maybe outline:

> otherwise we can still "move" or "transfer" a socket or file across fibers without risks.
